Micrometer monitoring blog (#410)
kiegroup/optaplanner-website: content/blog/2021/10/02/MonitorTheSolver.adoc

= Monitor OptaPlanner solvers through Micrometer
Christopher-Chianelli
2021-10-02
:page-interpolate: true
:jbake-type: post
:jbake-tags: monitoring, production
:jbake-social_media_share_image: GrafanaGraphExample.png

> It's 11pm on Friday evening. Everything was working fine -- until now.

Reviewer: I guess it should become this then?
```suggestion
It's 11 PM on Friday evening. Everything was working fine -- until now.
```

cd optaplanner-micrometer-blog
----

Start the application in development mode:

[source,bash]
----
mvn quarkus:dev
----

After the application is started, you can access the application at http://localhost:8080.
To see available metrics for the application, visit http://localhost:8080/q/metrics.

image:ExampleMonitoringApp.png[Example Application]

== Starting Prometheus

Prometheus has a prebuilt Docker image on Dockerhub that can be used for running Prometheus.
We'll need to modify its configuration so it'll scrape our metrics endpoint.

Create the `prometheus.yml` file with the following text:

[source,yaml]
----
scrape_configs:
- job_name: local application
  scrape_interval: 1s
  metrics_path: /q/metrics
  static_configs:
  - targets:
    - localhost:8080
----

This configures Prometheus to scrape metrics from `localhost:8080/q/metrics` every second.

Start Prometheus with the preceding configuration:

[source,bash]
----
docker run \
    --network host \
    --mount type=bind,source=prometheus.yml,destination=/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml,ro=true,relabel=shared \
     prom/prometheus
----

You can see the Prometheus UI by visiting http://localhost:9090.

> image::PrometheusUI.png[Prometheus UI]

Reviewer: Can the prometheus UI image show an optaplanner metric?
Do we first need to explain monitoring with a non-optaplanner metric or can we directly explain it with an optaplanner metric?

> = Monitor the solver

Reviewer: How about? 
```suggestion
= Monitor OptaPlanner solvers through MicroMeter
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
= Monitor OptaPlanner solvers through Micrometer
```

Christopher-Chianelli
2021-10-02
:page-interpolate: true
:jbake-type: post

> :jbake-tags: monitoring, production

Reviewer: That grafana screenshot (especially the graph, the rest can be cut off) is a good candidate for the social media share image:

```suggestion
:jbake-tags: monitoring, production
:jbake-social_media_share_image: GrafanaGraphExample.png 
```

Reviewer: Or the PrometheusUI.png image, that might be even better.

Reviewer: the prometheus doesn't show an optaplanner metric, so the grafana one is better

> It's 11pm on Friday evening. Everything was working fine -- until now.

Reviewer 2: 11 PM (IBM SG)

Suddenly services are failing left and right, and your boss want to know why.

> One tool in achieving a diagnosis is to use a monitoring system. Let's add monitoring to OptaPlanner and see if we can diagnose this issue.

Reviewer: This paragraph is a very good start! It talks about the benefit for the user.

"the achieving sentence" I would drop. "add" I 'd replace by "enable" (it sounds like less effort and it is not a lot of effort).
```suggestion
Let's enable monitoring to the OptaPlanner nodes and see if we can diagnose this issue.
```

== What is monitoring?

_Monitoring_ is observing the quality of a service over time.

> Mointoring is similar to logging, except its output is more easily analyzed by a machine.

Reviewer: Monitoring also typically aggregates across multiple nodes.

The software being monitored output _metrics_, a numerical measurement of some aspect of the software.

> The metrics then get recorded in a monitoring system, where it can be graphed, trigger alerts, and be correlated with events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The metrics are then recorded in a monitoring system where they can be graphed, trigger alerts, and be correlated with events.
```

For instance, you can monitor a web service.
Its metrics could include the number of hits to a particular endpoint, time to respond to a request, and the number of failures.
If the number of hits suddenly increase, it could correspond to the Slashdot effect or a potential Denial of Service attack.
If the average time to respond to a request is increasing because there are not enough servers to fulfill requests, you might want to acquire additional servers.
Additionally, monitoring allow you to see the effect a change has on the entire system.
If you notice the time to respond to a request with the same load as before decreases after a change was pushed, you can conclude the change improved performance.

> 

Reviewer: Instead of explaining what monitoring can do for a REST service, can we explain what it does for the OptaPlanner?

Some advantages I see:
- How many solvers ran last night? How many are running now? Is that why my server room is so hot in the middle of the night?
- How long did they ran? If we double the number of datasets, solvers or solving time, will we get everything solved by 7 AM every day?
- Did any run abnormally long or surprisingly short? Any anomalies we should be investigating?
- Did any throw errors?

== Connecting monitoring systems to OptaPlanner

OptaPlanner uses https://micrometer.io/[Micrometer] to collect its metrics.
Micrometer then send the metrics to different monitoring systems using _registries_.
Every monitoring system supported by Micrometer has its own registry.

> For instance, to connect OptaPlanner to https://prometheus.io/[Prometheus], you would

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For instance, to connect OptaPlanner to https://prometheus.io/[Prometheus], you must
```

add its registry as a dependency in the `pom.xml`:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>io.micrometer</groupId>

>   <artifactId>micrometer-registry-prometheus</artifactId>

Reviewer: On Quarkus, we use a different prometheus micrometer dependency, right? One that uses this one.

  <version>${micrometer.version}</version>
</dependency>
----

Then you would add the Prometheus registry to the global registry:

[source,java]
----
PrometheusMeterRegistry prometheusRegistry = new PrometheusMeterRegistry(PrometheusConfig.DEFAULT);

try {
   HttpServer server = HttpServer.create(new InetSocketAddress(8080), 0);
   server.createContext("/prometheus", httpExchange -> {
       String response = prometheusRegistry.scrape();
       httpExchange.sendResponseHeaders(200, response.getBytes().length);
       try (OutputStream os = httpExchange.getResponseBody()) {
           os.write(response.getBytes());
       }
   });

   new Thread(server::start).start();
} catch (IOException e) {
   throw new RuntimeException(e);
}

Metrics.addRegistry(prometheusRegistry);
----

> If you use Quarkus or Spring Boot, this is already set up for you; you just need to add the registry dependency for your monitoring system.

Reviewer: Can we start with a section for Quarkus - which will be very short I guess, but I would mention the actual artifactId to use (maybe show a pom.xml snippet of the dependency)

Then a section for Spring Boot and then this long section for plain Java?
Motivation: 1) most users that do monitoring will be using Quarkus or Spring Boot. 2) the plain java way is awfully long.

Reviewer: I'd even argue that the "plain java" explanation isn't needed in the blog (only in our docs). I guesstimate that 99% of the users that actually do monitoring, will do it with the help of quarkus or spring boot.

For information on how to connect Micrometer to other monitoring system, visit https://micrometer.io/docs[the Micrometer documentation].

== Monitoring the Solver

> Now that we know what monitoring is and how it can be useful, let walk through an actual example. We'll be running a modified version of the https://github.com/kiegroup/optaplanner-quickstarts/tree/stable/use-cases/school-timetabling[school timetabling quickstart] with support for multitenancy.

Reviewer 3: Nitpick: use https://asciidoctor.org/docs/asciidoc-recommended-practices/#one-sentence-per-line to get smaller diffs (and other benefits).

> Now that we know what monitoring is and how it can be useful, let walk through an actual example. We'll be running a modified version of the https://github.com/kiegroup/optaplanner-quickstarts/tree/stable/use-cases/school-timetabling[school timetabling quickstart] with support for multitenancy.

Author: I tried to do that, but missed it in several places

> The complete source code, along with scripts for running, can be https://github.com/Christopher-Chianelli/optaplanner-micrometer-blog[found on GitHub].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can find the complete source code, along with scripts for running it, on the https://github.com/Christopher-Chianelli/optaplanner-micrometer-blog[optaplanner-micrometer-blog] Github page.
```

== Starting the application

Clone the example code:

[source,bash]
----
git clone https://github.com/Christopher-Chianelli/optaplanner-micrometer-blog
cd optaplanner-micrometer-blog
----

> The application can be started by running development mode:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Start the application in development mode:
```

[source,bash]
----
mvn quarkus:dev
----

> Once started, you can access the application at https://localhost:8080. To see available metrics for the application, visit https://localhost:8080/q/metrics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the application is started, you can access the application at https://localhost:8080. To see available metrics for the application, visit https://localhost:8080/q/metrics.
```

image:ExampleMonitoringApp.png[Example Application]

== Starting Prometheus

Prometheus has a prebuilt Docker image on Dockerhub that can be used for running Prometheus.
We'll need to modify it configuration so it'll scrape our metrics endpoint.

> Create `prometheus.yml` with the following text:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create the `prometheus.yml` file with the following text:
```

[source,yaml]
----
scrape_configs:
- job_name: local application
  scrape_interval: 1s
  metrics_path: /q/metrics
  static_configs:
  - targets:
    - localhost:8080
----

This configures Prometheus to scrape metrics from `localhost:8080/q/metrics` every second.

> To start Prometheus using the following configuration, run the command below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Start Prometheus with the following configuration:
```

[source,bash]
----
docker run \
    --network host \
    --mount type=bind,source=prometheus.yml,destination=/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml,ro=true,relabel=shared \
     prom/prometheus
----

You can see the Prometheus UI by visiting https://localhost:9090.

image::PrometheusUI.png[Prometheus UI]

== Starting Grafana

https://grafana.com/[Grafana] provides a much more robust UI with additional features.

> Grafana has a prebuilt image on Dockerhub you can use to run Grafana locally. Start it using the command below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Grafana has a prebuilt image on Dockerhub that you can use to run Grafana locally. Start it using the following command:
```

[source,bash]
----
docker run --network host grafana/grafana
----

> It may take a while to start. Once started,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It might take a while to start. After it starts,
```

visit https://localhost:3000 to see the Grafana UI. Login with the username "admin" and the password "admin".

== Connecting Grafana to Prometheus

> . Click on the Gear icon to go to the Configuration page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Click the Gear icon to go to the Configuration page.
```

. Click the "Add data source" button.
. Select "Prometheus".
. Enter "http://localhost:9090" for the URL field.
. (Optional) Set the Scrape Interval to be equal to the one set for Prometheus (1s).
. Click "Save & Test".

> If it is set up correctly, a green textbox should appear above "Save & Test" with text "Data source is working".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If it is set up correctly, a green textbox will appear above "Save & Test" with text "Data source is working".
```

> image::GrafanaConfigurePrometheus.png[Grafana Prometheus Configuration]

Reviewer: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/176880/135223622-e4a0a697-9d09-4ffe-a042-46d595d8a106.png)

Reviewer: I'd even use a red text or a red rectangle to annotate in the screenshot what they are looking at: the number of active solvers.

== Create a dashboard to monitor metrics

With all that setup, we can finally graph some metrics.

> . Click on the "+" icon on the left sidebar.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Click the "+" icon on the left sidebar.
```

. Click "Add an empty panel".
. Beneath "A", in the text box to the right of "Metrics", enter "optaplanner_solver_solve_duration_seconds_active_count". This adds a graph for the number of active solvers. It might say "No data" if no solvers were started yet.

> . Click on the clock icon in the top right, and select "Last 5 minutes" under "Relative time range". This make the dashboard show data that occurred during the past 5 minutes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Click the clock icon in the top right, and select "Last 5 minutes" under "Relative time range". The dashboard shows data that occurred during the past 5 minutes.
```

> . Click on the arrow to the right of the Refresh icon, and click "5s". This make the dashboard refresh every 5 seconds.

Reviewer 3: No such arrow on my instance of Graphana (obtained by following the steps above).

![Screen Shot 2021-09-28 at 17 04 27-fullpage](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/673386/135114187-0770dd0d-c9a6-4030-8b7c-599c860dcef3.png)

Author: Odd; did the Grafana UI changed? I used latest in the docker image, but it might have used an older copy locally

Reviewer 3: ```
$ podman images grafana
REPOSITORY                 TAG         IMAGE ID      CREATED     SIZE
docker.io/grafana/grafana  latest      a38f70e6466e  7 days ago  219 MB
```

Author: Can confirm I was using an outdated version; look like that feature was removed from the editor :(

> . Click on the arrow to the right of the Refresh icon, and click "5s". This make the dashboard refresh every 5 seconds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Click the arrow to the right of the Refresh icon, and click "5s". This make the dashboard refresh every 5 seconds.
```

== Metrics available

Beside "optaplanner_solver_solve_duration_seconds_active_count", there are several other metrics available by default:

- optaplanner_solver_errors_total: the total number of errors that occurred while solving since the start of the measuring.

- optaplanner_solver_solve_duration_seconds_max: run time of the longest-running currently active solver.

- optaplanner_solver_solve_duration_seconds_duration_sum: the sum of each active solver’s solve duration. For example, if there are two active solvers, one running for three minutes and the other for one minute, the total solve time is four minutes.

In 8.12.0.Final and above, additional metrics can be configured by adding a `<monitoring>` section to the solver config:

[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<solver xmlns="https://www.optaplanner.org/xsd/solver" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
        xsi:schemaLocation="https://www.optaplanner.org/xsd/solver https://www.optaplanner.org/xsd/solver/solver.xsd">
  <monitoring>
    <metric>BEST_SCORE</metric>
    <metric>CONSTRAINT_MATCH_TOTAL_BEST_SCORE</metric>
    <!-- ... -->
  </monitoring>
</solver>
----

> For full details on OptaPlanner monitoring support, see the https://docs.optaplanner.org/latest/optaplanner-docs/html_single/index.html#monitoring[the monitoring section of the OptaPlanner docs].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more information about OptaPlanner monitoring support, see the https://docs.optaplanner.org/latest/optaplanner-docs/html_single/index.html#monitoring[Monitoring] section of the OptaPlanner documentation.
```

== What next?

> This tutorial only covered the basics of what you can do with Grafana. Additional things you can do:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This tutorial covers the basics of what you can do with Grafana. Additional things you can do:
```
